Once in my presence and once when you sit down with your diaper.
Tell me again what this room is.
We call this collection development.
As individuals who have an interest in an author who really don't have the time to pursue or to choose not to build the collections themselves, they'll say, I don't know who we have here.
This is the Conrad collection.
I started with somebody.
The gentleman said, I want all the first of Conrad.
So as we find acceptable copies, we know they're sold.
We put them aside for them.
I would say it represents a small percentage of my customers, but it's probably the wealthier percentage.
I think it takes the fun out of it, but because I'm in business to sell books, I'm open-minded enough that I'm not going to say, well, I'm not going to do it.
I'm going to say, I'll help you in any way I can because I wish to accommodate it.
Describe again this collection here.
This is part of actually a client who came in with his wife who was married 21 years and gave me 21 authors.
build complete collections of first editions with no budget, which is the best way to build it.
No budget.
This is a Beverly Hills person?
Yeah, it's a Los Angeles person, who's very well-known, who I can't mention.
But unfortunately, I can't, because he's certainly one of the wealthiest people in the world.
Believe it or not, we can't even use his name in the shop.
I have about six customers who I only could use by cold, even in the shop.
I mean, I would use an issue.
It's called I.I.
This is I.I.'
's collection.
We have some people who actually say, you do not have permission to ever use my name.
He's one of them.
But he just started collecting them.
No, he never collected them.
He's only been in my shop once.
I'll never see him again, I'm sure.
He's collecting.
Yeah, I'm collecting.
I get all the fun, get the profits, and sometimes I get to keep the books go off.
I have books I'll buy for customers, and it'll be two years before they'll pick it up.
They'll say, I'm building a library already in two years, and when it's finished, you send me everything, you know?
Can you tell me who some of the authors are?
Yeah.
Well, actually, we only have 13 of them down so far.
It's Austin, Bronte, Trollope, Dickens, Edith Wharton, strangely enough, John Steinbeck, Henry James,
George Eliot was going to be all British.
No, it wasn't.
Actually, the Americans are... It's just a matter of personal taste.
You can sit back there if you like.
Sure.
A coffee or something?
If you're going to have some, we'll have some, but nothing... I'd love some coffee, because I've been running around a little bit.
We'd love some too, actually.
Okay.
Are you sure?
Is that your show?
Yeah, she'd like some.
Are you two together?
Let's talk a little bit about it.
Well, I think there's something sad about it, though, in that we've been in business 27 years, and when we started out in Hollywood Boulevard, there were 22 bookshops here.
That's where used and answering books there is one left.
They're all closing up because in all large cities in the United States, and it's probably true in England too, there's a reduced number of retail spaces for small businesses because commercial rent has gotten so high.
Excuse me, this is Bruce Kittrick, and he's looking, he wanted to look at the early books.
No charge to look, good to see you.
Nice to see you.
If you don't mind us chatting, you go right ahead.
I didn't want to interrupt, so that's fine.
I haven't said anything interesting in almost two years.
Great.
Well, we could exchange woody letters at this rate, huh?
Right.
Just go through there, or you can peek through the safe if you want afterwards, have some incunables in there.
Oh, okay, great.
And it's strictly arranged according to the position on the shelf.
Well, we put it according to size these days and color, I think.
Okay.
And we think that people keep mixing it up.
As a Samuel Peach, everything is by size.
That's right.
Remember that?
I went up there by April.
It was fascinating.
So it started in 1963 when we started.
But the point I was trying to make is that there's a reduced number of entrepreneurial jobs because there's not the inventory to support them anymore.
It's not so much the clients.
You can't cultivate clients if you don't have inventory.
And so this is how I see it.
This has probably nothing to do with anything in my own perception or things, but it's my brief.
There are fewer and fewer antiquarian booksellers, but you can't start out in the business because you have no place to start with an inventory, right?
You mean certainly in a city?
Yeah, in a city.
Well, actually, as a whole, most people who go into the used or antiquarian book business really go into books that are available, which is modern literature,
which is what is findable.
Children's books, which is very visual, or art books, which are visual, but it's primarily 20th century.
It's so difficult to obtain.
And you can find this on the institutional level.
Oh, yeah.
When Texas wanted to start a major collection, they decided to focus on the 20th century, because all the great stuff is gone.
Sure.
And they were smart to do it, because they did it at the time when it was there, and today it's gone.
I mean, you went to the Humanities Research Center?
Yep.
Extraordinary.
It's so overwhelming, though, when you see 13 copies of Ulysses in First Division.
It's more than that, I think.
Well, when I was there five years ago, they had 13 out of 100 copies.
Now they have 19 or something?
I don't know what it is.
I said 41, and Tom Stanley said, well, not quite.
Well, 41 out of 100 would be really unlikely.
It's in the 20s.
Yeah.
Well, they don't buy those copies, though, I don't think.
Yeah, they do.
I mean, they wouldn't continue to.
You could never sell them that book today.
They basically, I don't think they bought them mindfully.
They were buying in such large lines.
Well, I think they were buying collections.
They were buying collections in the net kind of .
And every important literature collection had to have the first edition of Ulysses in it, because that's a cornerstone book.
So what happened is they had .
And the sad part about it is that they have poor policies in deacquisitioning, for letting go of this material.
A lot of that has to do with the statewide.
It's kind of like selling a snow plow.
They have to get bids and all that.
I think there are different stories about it.
I mean, Huntington Library, for years,
had, when Cary Bliss was there, had a department that, it was like, they ran a bookshop.
I got the catalogs.
No, they had actually, Cary Bliss, well, he used to do Little Lists, that's right.
I mean, I've got the Huntington Library catalogs, which is deaccessioning.
Right.
Yeah, but I used to buy wonderful things.
Maybe recently.
Oh, no, this is Cary Bliss, it's been five years since, seven years, probably, since I've gotten anything, but 15 or 20 years ago, I used to go there, like a bookshop, and
It was wonderful.
So you've been a bookman for 27 years.
Tell me a little bit how you got into this business.
What did you do before this?
I had a newspaper route.
Yeah, I laugh about that because I put that on a bank application form recently, and they insisted you had to put down two jobs.
And I said, well, I've always had the same job.
I said, sir, it says two.
You have to put down your last job.
So I put newspaper up, you know.
And this was, I think I was applying for a loan for a house or something.
And nobody ever questioned me about it because nobody actually reads the second line.
You know, it's like putting down your closest relatives.
Nobody wants to call them.
But I've always, I got out of high school, and
opened a used bookshop in Compton, which is primarily a black area, completely illiterate, and all I did was acquire an enormous quantity of books with no customers.
You were acquired in that area?
Well, we did because most of the people in the area were maintenance people, and they would go to Beverly Hills clean houses and hallway books and other things and sell everything else, and they couldn't sell the books, and since we were in Compton, we were buying these books for a nickel apiece.
Did you build a pretty good stock that way?
If you're impressed with Connelly, we had a wonderful stock.
We had the world's largest collection of Peter's Digest.
Great.
You probably still have it.
No, we've since disposed of it.
But we had, in Connelly, we had an enormous stock, but they were not books that had any value on it.
How do you explain the transformation from that to this?
No, it's interesting.
It's usually one of the most extraordinary book stories I've seen.
Well, thank you.
But it's essential to me to learn
in order to understand what's really valuable, to learn what's plentiful.
And through the process of dealing with news books and more plentiful books, I think you get a better grasp of what is uncommon.
And it's through our experience of
of recognizing that we see things infrequently, we make our own judgments.
Because, you know, pricing is really so subjective, as you're obviously aware at this point, I would think.
You know, you'll see six copies of the books from $200 to $2,000.
Conceivably, they could all be priced intelligently if the specifics on them are accurate, or one is complete or incomplete, or association, or whatever.
But what is your question?
You're doing very well.
I guess I was asking if you could, if you're clearing your home mind, how you went from... Oh, there's a... ...the four neighborhoods where people couldn't read to this one extreme or the other.
Could not say that one event, it's the right position in that we were... had a very limited overhead, so we weren't concerned.
My brother and I were single for the first six years of our business,
We shared a room for $60 a month and we actually didn't know we were working.
We thought we were having a great time pursuing a hobby.
We were working seven days a week and we worked every night and finally one of us got married and we started working every other night and I felt like I was unemployed.
Because when you're used to that kind of schedule it completely changes.
But I think what made it so easy is that we never felt like we were going to work.
It has to be more than hard work.
You had to receive the market.
You had to do something to go from... I think there really is an enormous time period.
Put it another way, you mentioned there were 22 to 24 stores.
It can't just be an attrition that you're the only one who remains, or one of the few who remains.
somebody said you know uh you know you guys have really always been very lucky and i said you know the amazing thing is the harder we work the luckier we get you know that's how i feel that i really feel that we put a lot of years in the last few years i've been about lazy though i haven't really uh put out a lot of energy the summers i take half the summers off and i have a family with the children and uh my energies are directed elsewhere now but uh i really i mean i i'm really committed to my business
I've called you, by the way.
Let's see, what year is this?
This is a 90.
God, that's depressing.
There's a reason for my asking the question.
I've noticed that going to these sales, particularly, that there is really a new generation of bookseller, of which you are up to.
I mean, there are still, well, Jake Zeigler now, of course, is gone, and you still see a Dave Kirschbaum, and then you see a Rostenberg and a Stern.
Yeah, great.
and 70s and 80s, but there is a gap.
But there's a group of young things, and I'm young, I'm mid-40s myself, so I'm saying young.
But there is really a gap when you think about it, because I think there are relatively few booksellers from 50 to 65 than there are plus 65 and under 45.
A new emerging generation, which is really playing the game smartly, I mean, with aggressiveness, with style.
I see you guys play at the... Well, I think there are more businessmen out there now than there used to be, I'll tell you that.
And those are the ones that have survived to a certain extent.
Tell me a little bit about that.
Are you a businessman first and a bookman second?
Well, I hate to acknowledge this, to tell you the truth, but I really feel that if I wasn't in the book business, I'd be incredibly rich.
I weren't in the book business because I'm in a business that deals in a product that's not replaceable.
And I'm a reasonably good salesperson.
You're being very modest, but I'm told you're the most successful bookseller in the United States.
And that is so pathetic, because it's such a small business.
Is it true, do you think?
Well, I think that considering that we made our money in the book business, and our part of living in the book business, we're probably... I think that maybe we are.
I never stopped to think about it.
I think that we certainly went through a greater transition than any other bookseller.
seller, and maybe that's what has allowed it to happen.
But I really think the formative years were essential in order to get to... Was there a dramatic jump from where... Or was it just... We didn't fall into a great collection or... There was no one single event that I think that really made a significant difference.
I think humanistically, it happened.
But if I relied on one thing on one customer, which is always a scary thing to me because
It's very transitionary in that everybody has a good customer for a while, but the question is how long will they be there?
Because ultimately they either run out of interest or they run out of money or more often interest because they're five, ten years they're worth books, fifteen years, but then they pick up other things.
People who are collectors of art tend to drift from coins to stamps to books to art.
That's how I find it.
And a lot of them maybe they keep a basic interest, but if you don't have material to
feed them, to supply them, that they're apt to gift.
And that's why we're sort of aggressive in buying.
We feel that you can't really maintain and cultivate a clientele unless you really have something to offer.
How do you... I've got so many questions to ask of you.
You're just raising so many good ones, but you... I know you haven't written down anything interesting to me.
I'm following here.
It's pretty small to have so much.
You said that you are an aggressive person when it comes to
Well, I'm glad that I'm subtle about it, but I think I'm aggressive.
How do you identify things that you want to require?
Well, see, I go slightly different.
I pursue anything that appears to be an opportunity, in that I don't look for specific kinds of books.
I look for books that are unusually valuable in any field, or manuscript material.
And if you have enough... When I say books, I'm including the bribe... Yeah, right.
But once you have the material,
you could develop an interest.
Of course, through my own enthusiasm, I'm really selling.
Most of the things I sell to people, most of the time, they never heard of it, you know, half the time.
Because of my own enthusiasm, I can pass that on.
Now, if I say something I believe is really uncommon or rare, I mean, I wouldn't say it unless I believed it, and I could share that with people who I've developed a relationship with, and that's how I could develop customers' interests.
You have already demonstrated...
very commendably how discreet you are in protecting the identity of your clients, and I thoroughly respect that.
But I wonder if you can distribute an idea.
We are certainly in West Los Angeles, half a block or so from Beverly Hills, and I would imagine that you have an unusual kind of client base.
Mm-hmm.
I do.
There are two kinds of people out there.
Actually, our business has changed in the last five years, so it's a little deceptive.
I'm much more gift-oriented now than ever before.
I'd say 30% of my sales are not for the people who walk out with the book.
And it used to be... Well, that's how I set up my shop, though.
I want to make it sort of an experience.
You drag somebody here, and they buy a book for somebody else.
But I would say, well, I'm guessing at 30%.
I know it's a much larger percentage than it's ever been.
And we're always constantly sending things as gifts for people.
So you might have a woman come in and say, you know my husband's collection.
Why don't you sit down with us, Ben?
We'll just check the way.
So you become something of an advisor.
Well, not so much.
Well, we have to have an understanding
of what we've sold people.
Right.
And we have a better idea of using it.
But I think he'd love this.
I don't know what he... It's not always for a relative, though.
I just offer that as an example.
But is that the kind of thing that happens, I wonder?
Absolutely.
I'm just saying we probably sell books or rare books as a gift item more often than most people in this business.
That's all.
much harder.
Wouldn't you say, I'd say 25, 30% of others might well be gift items.
Very possible.
I mean, it's surprising.
By the way, this is Ben talking all over here, and this is Lou.
Hello, machine.
This is for the benefit of my typist.
We were just talking about the nature.
I guess I'm interested.
I've heard it stated by a number of people, a number of dealers, as a matter of fact, East Coast dealers, and maybe it's solid grapes on their part.
but it is suggested that the real action in book selling today is out here well thank you and i don't mean just i don't mean just in this building but i mean in the west coast i've heard it said before but i've always heard that the grass is greener on the other side of the fence i guarantee you from their perspective i can see how they might think that because people who are out of town have a tendency to like to save on uh taxes and things of that sort if it's being shipped out of state
They certainly wouldn't have to pay a tax.
So maybe we sell a lot of our books out of state, and they also sell a lot of them.
Don't believe for a second.
If we didn't take this bookshop and move it to New York City or Philadelphia, then we wouldn't be a very successful business.
You think so?
How many inventories have you seen like this?
I haven't seen any like this.
Well, the reason is because you have to have the inventory to get the people.
Yeah, but you have to do the business to get the wherewithal to build the inventory.
No, I know, but I'm saying... You just told me you sold a three-quarter of a million dollar library.
Built a library, yes.
That's a pretty significant sale.
There are people all over the country with that kind of funds available.
All over the country.
I don't know how many booksellers... I spoke to a bookseller this morning who's made that kind of... I spoke to a bookseller this morning who had somebody walk in the first time and spend $125,000.
Well, it was an English book, so I sent them there.
An American?
An American, yeah.
But I mean, this guy who lives in Philadelphia.
It depends on the type of custom history of culture.
We've been in the book business 27 years.
We've really established a reputation for ourselves.
Lou and I have both worked extremely hard.
have a pulse of what's going on in the book business.
We travel to all the auctions.
We go to all the book fairs.
I'm not suggesting it's not fortuitous that we're close to Beverly Hills where there are obviously a lot of rich people.
We can't overlook that.
If we move this to Alabama, it would be a long time before we're living the kind of life we'd like to live.
Well, I think we're talking major metropolitan areas.
But let me rephrase the question.
One of these, Marcia McGee-Cardiff, as she said,
for the record, which is a while I'll repeat it.
Who's this?
Marsha Carter.
She's Larry McMurch.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, sure.
Nice woman.
And she said, it's all out.
Anyone who doesn't realize that the book trade, the book business is really happening on the West Coast is not watching what's going on.
They all claim they'd be better out here when they do fairs.
She said, but the quote was, it's a wonderful quote.
And I said, well, why?
I said, there's money in the East Coast.
Who are we kidding?
I mean, I've seen Bob Peary spend big bucks at the Bradley Martin sale and others.
And so have you.
And we know who some of the players are.
They come from all over the United States.
She said, newer money is happier money is freer money.
That's a wonderful quote.
I delight.
And I wonder if you would agree with that.
Do you think that maybe that there is happier money out here, more disposable money?
You know, it's not nine generations in the family.
I'm sure that has something to do with it, but I really feel...
We, to a certain extent, take credit for that.
There are a lot of customers here because we have worked with a lot of those people over the last 25 years and developed that interest.
We believe if there weren't good shops to get the interest started, those customers would never be there.
I think if you put some of the other books that was there who didn't have the aggressiveness that we had, you would not have had some of the customers that we've developed.
And those customers, the customer that went out to London and spent $125,000, he started out over here through our enthusiasm and then we worked with him.
So I think that... I'm curious, why did you send the customers to England?
You couldn't get them what he wanted?
No, I didn't actually send them.
He went to England with somebody, and they made a large purchase, but he was there for business.
I didn't send him to buy books.
I mean, you wouldn't send... I mean, you'd almost endeavour to get him what he was looking for.
Absolutely.
That's not a typical situation.
Obviously, we're business people, and we try to sell people our own inventory, but we also recognise we're not the only shop.
but we have enough confidence to believe that we encourage our customers to go elsewhere, to get a sense of what else there is.
Then they generally come back because they recognize the trouble we want to accumulate this inventory, and they often make purchases because of it.
One of the themes of my book, and if there is a theme that will tie all these diverse chapters together, is the passion.
The passion.
I'll be very empathetic at the word.
That drives a person to spend
whatever it is, to invest so much energy into the possession of books, motivation.
I mean, that's not my title.
But I guess what I'm asking is, do you, either of you, have a fix on what drives a person to want to possess these things?
I'd be surprised if there was an answer for all people.
There are definitely many different answers.
And I'd like you both to address yourself.
So Ben will try it first.
Well, I think, first of all, there's an intrinsic value to a book, you know, the association of this is a first edition of something that was produced during the author's lifetime and possibly he held in his hand.
So there's a closeness to the author.
There's also a visual appeal.
You know, there are a lot of books that are sold for visual reasons.
And I think some people might say, oh, I have this big house and this big library, and therefore I want to fill my shelves with beautiful literature, because now I have everything else in my life I never want.
That's kind of putting the card before the horse, though.
And there is one major collector who I've interviewed who started collecting for precisely that reason.
He wanted the library.
He visualized it, and then started buying Shakespeare's at auction.
I think there is a real surprise among collectors, especially new collectors, in what is available.
People are almost always shocked who start out collecting.
They say, you could buy a first edition of Treasure Island for, you know, $500 or $1,500.
You could buy a first edition of Charles Gardner Verse or, you know, one of the classics of what they consider the 19th century classics for a relatively low price.
You could buy first editions of Bioga, Mark Twain, for $25 to $300 because he was so popular late in his life that his books are enormously plentiful.
And so people are really genuinely shocked, and they feel there's a quality here that they don't see perhaps in other areas, and they're really, I think, don't you think they're surprised about it?
Don't you think that's a purely common response?
Well, they're surprised that all these things aren't in museums and libraries.
And it's naive, but I mean... It is that way.
There's more to it than that.
Because we can go to a museum and see these things and say how beautiful they are.
I think that people that collect books also have maybe collected, there's a certain type of collector that only spends maybe three years of his life occupied with the thought of collecting books, and prior to that maybe he collected coins, and prior to that he might have collected antique furniture, and I'm talking about the people with large amounts of money to spend.
And it's a diversion for them, and I think they kind of drift into it as another area.
I don't think... You know, I think... They also love the response they get from people when people look at their libraries, because it's not like looking at art or something.
It's sort of a little bit more mysterious, you know?
Well, I find... What I found is that the real book person, generally, it's not like putting a picture on a wall.
It's not something that you buy the show to somebody else.
Well, maybe it's not, but I was just saying there's a real satisfaction in having it, from a lot of people I know, and the response that people who are non-collectors get.
You know, it's funny, if you know a little bit about a field and the other person knows nothing, you're pure to know a great deal.
You brought up something which, in the many interviews that I've conducted in this research,
It's interesting.
I haven't talked with anybody about somebody coming in and saying, I want to collect, but I don't know what.
Help me.
Oh, that's an extremely common question for us.
You get that.
Well, more so in this building.
I'll tell you, this building has brought us to a different kind of climbing to a certain extent.
People would be uncomfortable walking into a used bookshop and buying their book for $500, but they'd come in to us and they wouldn't feel uncomfortable because they'd almost expect it.
And I think it has to do a lot with the ambiance that we've created in the building, near proximity to Rodeo Drive, may have something to do with it.
Exactly.
It is intimidating to have to ring a doorbell and have somebody come to the door to say, once you're in the door, you feel almost an obligation.
Well, we're not a high question.
No, we're not.
We're certainly not.
But I would say the percentage of sales are greater than any other store where people just walk in and out.
We have very few people, and we might have 10 people a day.
Of course, most of our business is mail order catalogs and phone calls, things like that.
Is most of your business local?
It's hard to say.
Well, it's hard to say.
I don't think so.
I don't think so at all.
Most of it's definitely not local.
I would say most of it is phone calls from out-of-state, mail order.
Really?
Really, it's much more so, I think we could look at our books, but I bet you 50% of our sales were out of state last year.
Right.
Should we go home early?
That's what I know, 5.30.
You know what it is?
It's that also many people come from out of town, and if they're coming to Los Angeles, they're going to come and see us.
So if they walk into the door, it's still not local, it's still out of town.
That's a great thing, because if you're at all interested in books, at least you've probably heard of us.
We miss very few people.
It's very unusual if somebody's been collecting for a few years, comes to the West Coast, and wouldn't stop him to see us.
That's what makes it sense.
Now, I wouldn't be a journalist of any stature if I didn't ask you the question.
I asked if you thought that you were perhaps the most successful bookseller in the United States, and you said it was possible.
Could you give me a rough idea of what your gross?
Well, it's about $4 million.
But that's why I say it's not a lot, considering, because it's such a small business.
That's the gross?
Yeah.
I mean, it's not like, that's all.
I mean, you thought it was like $20 million.
I thought, well, I haven't told it.
It was like $20 million.
I know.
Everybody tells you.
It's not.
You know how hard it is to spend $20 million?
Another seller told me $20 million.
They don't know.
I mean, we, that's all gross.
And that's why I'm saying it's such a small business.
Maybe it'll cost $5 million this year.
But it's certainly in that range.
It's not $20 million.
I mean, I don't know, but it's not, uh,
It's not what people say it is.
But I imagine you're flattered, at least, or are you annoyed when you hear those figures?
Well, what annoys me or humors me more than anything is when people say it as if it was factual.
I happen to know it's common knowledge.
That's good information.
But it's funny you should throw 20, because that's exactly the figure I've heard from a very prominent East color.
I heard I did 40.
You know, I'm sorry to hear all this because my brother has been fooling around with those books for a long time now and not sharing it with me.
I've been looking very well, and I appreciate it.
But I mean, we know that the English firms like Quaritch and Max gross 15 million dollars, 8 million pounds, 12 million pounds, something like that.
Well, Quaritch is unbelievable.
What did they do this year?
No.
Because it's published.
Yeah, we saw it someplace.
I think they also count all of their purchases that they purchased at auction, though, as part of that.
Yeah, so that's the whole thing.
We don't count our auction purchases.
Of course, we're talking about straight sales.
I understand that Quaritch, though, they made some kind of deal where they were awash in it.
Oh, yeah, they sold the great collection of botanical books.
Exactly.
Five million pounds.
They almost had to go out.
And they dominated when they wanted to, for some of these reasons.
Well, they always have, because it's such a small business.
Somebody came in with $10 to $20 million.
It's an enormous amount of money.
You go into the art world, you buy a painting for 15 million hours, and you move on.
In our business, it's a relatively, it's incomprehensible thing.
You did say something interesting earlier.
If you were doing something else, you'd be a very wealthy man.
Oh, I said that believing it, that's why.
Because I said we have... Like what?
I mean, what do you think?
I love what I do, and I wasn't suggesting I do something else, but I think I have a real frustration with being constant in that
We've moved three times, and we've always changed and increased.
Our staff tried to do relatively creative things, considering it's not a business that's changed dramatically in the last 500 years.
You have a book, you buy it, you sell it, and maybe how you promote it is slightly different.
Fact or myth?
Another story I heard.
See, you guys have built up your own mythology around you.
You made a killing in the real estate business and went into the... That was the best news I ever heard.
For 15 years before we ever bought a building, and it's true that, you know, property is a good place to put money, but, I mean, we bought our own building here, and it's doubled in value in five years, and we've made more money on paper, whatever that's worth, but you have to sell a building.
This building is worth probably over $4 million today or something, but we didn't buy it for that purpose.
And at some point, what would happen if their building was ever worth seven or eight million dollars or something, we'd say, hey, you know, it's crazy.
We could make more money by not working just on the building, by just renting or selling the building.
It's a sad reality.
Then what would you do?
We'd become collectors then.
Ben, Lou told me that he's a collector of sorts.
Do you just collect anything at all?
Any collecting interests?
I do, but it's periodic.
I've collected Stephen King, and I got tired of him, but I still have a small Stephen King collection.
But prior to that, I collected books on con men, books on forgeries, books on... Literary?
Literary, and any type of forgery, not necessarily literary.
Just mostly schemes and cons.
But we don't want that in the book.
No.
It's always had an interest in mine, but never used the knowledge for any great degree.
You did mention that there was a piece in the Times, the Sunday Times.
Oh, that was just a quote.
Yeah, but it is interesting.
There is a perception of a tripartite alliance between Cummins and yourself.
And Joseph.
And if it's true, you do have London and New York and L.A.
tied up.
Well, we have been working together for the last five years very actively in that
many important books and collections we view by or each other.
In other words, if I hear of something in London, I have Dave, go look at her on the New York gym, go look at her, I'll look at something on the West Coast.
And we cooperate very well, and there's a possibility someday in the future we may, in fact, do something to... Well, it might be the future of bookseller.
It's not the first time, because Warren Howell and Jake Zeitlin worked together all the time, although they were both in California, they were both coasts.
And I'm sure that Zeitlin also worked with Krauss and other dealers where they worked closely.
Is this mainly in terms of acquisitions or sales or trying to develop collections that you might sell?
Actually, all of them.
We've really, through a friendship, which makes it a lot easier, we just put it open.
Is this gentleman opening the safe of those?
Those are the internables, is that right?
Well, it's a two-book minimum.
Is that where you keep the internables?
Well, not necessarily 15th century books, because sometimes they're just 19th or 20th century books.
Well, actually earlier books, but they're certainly books that are more valuable or easier to disappear.
Of course, they're small, little ones.
They're Book of Hours or something like that.
So we don't want to lose them.
You know, ever since Ben and I have been in business, it's always been rumors.
People used to tell us, who's telling us?
Pet Boys.
We read the letters of the temple.
What do you call that?
I didn't spell it.
They might not have the PEP boys back in California.
It's an auto supply house.
My type is going to have a PEP.
We heard that rumor about 10 years ago.
It's funny why people won't accept the truth.
The truth is that we really work very hard on it.
This has always been our principal source of income, even though we've diversified and done other things.
that have been, unfortunately, successful.
We haven't used the outside money to put back on the business, because we've never taken outside money from anything.
We've taken the money out of this business and put it outside.
How have you diversified this service to me?
I mean, we have an interest in a hotel in New York City.
We own, in midtown Manhattan, we have a, I don't know, 40, what's collectively, 40 percent interest in it, about.
Which hotel is there?
It's called the Consulate Hotel.
It's on 49th Street.
It's a 210-room hotel.
Nice.
Yeah, it's a free place to stay for us.
That's why we originally, when we invested in it, it wasn't.
Well, it's true.
Do you stay when you're out of there?
I do.
My wife doesn't approve, because it's a, you know, like $75 a night.
It's very... How do we spell it?
Constated, C-O-N-S-U-L-A-T-E.
Okay.
49th Street.
And, but that was a relatively modest investment, because when we took that over and got involved in it, it was not
very profit was losing money.
Where was it on?
Did you say 49th?
49th between 7th and 8th.
Especially on the west side a little bit.
That's where they're rebuilding that entire area.
Actually, that turned out to be probably our best investment of all outside.
Not that we have so many, but that was certainly... Except for the book business investment.
Wait, is that where there's two brothers?
Are you kidding?
You might tell them about all the relatives we have in the business.
You know how many brothers we have in the book business?
Ten relatives.
See, I have a brother, Bob, between us and age, who has the Book Baron, a shop that has probably 300,000 books.
Where is that?
Bob is in Hawaiian Gardens, which is in California.
That's the name of the community?
Hawaiian?
Hawaiian Gardens, I think.
My brother, my sister Frances, has Book City, which has two shops, used book shops.
These are all used books in L.A., in Los Angeles, and Hollywood.
It's the one remaining shop I told you about.
It's a vibe.
My nephew, Danny, has a shop in the Valley.
My niece has a used bookshop in San Francisco.
What's the name of that store?
What's the name of Donna's store?
I don't know what the name is.
I've never been there.
It's a different bookshop.
Sam has a used bookshop called I Love Books.
What is that?
About Sacramento area.
How does this happen?
We could do well with this.
This has to be the easiest business in the world.
But do you do things with each other?
Well, we do.
We operate independently, really.
We're the only ones who really deal with more valuable books.
We get reasonable referrals from it.
And sometimes we offer more modest books, used books, that we tend to turn over to one of the other family members.
Although, strangely enough, we do relatively much less than people would think.
I mean, we're not at all competitive.
Well, did these other family members come to you, too, and say, hey, we'd like to get started.
What do we do?
Actually, they're all six brothers and two sisters.
And actually, everybody except Leah is in the book business now, isn't it?
Leah and Bobby.
I have a brother and a sister who are not.
And then I have a child on them, though.
And a step-sister.
But they're all in the used book business, and they're all pretty good business people, and I don't want to say except.
I want to say they're all reasonably good business people.
They do pretty good considering what they do, and they do books from $5 to $50 range, but they sell surprisingly large quantities.
If you have a chance, you ought to go to Book City in Hollywood.
It's like Strand in New York.
Really?
Book City and Hollywood.
Book City.
It's probably the biggest used bookshop in the West of the United States.
After Strand, it's probably the biggest used bookshop in the country, I would think.
The Strand is on a little more.
Yeah, well, The Strand is on a little more.
Yeah, I don't
And so one every two years, and that would be a lot.
I was hoping to sell them by the page.
How do you post books?
Very well.
I mean, I don't mean in terms of, how do you go above?
I mean, are the prices higher here?
I mean, you have a higher overhead.
I'd say there are some books that are geographically scarce.
That is, there are common books, the 19th century English books, that may be common in England but uncommon here, that I go over and bring back, and they're probably 20% or 30% higher.
I'm talking about $50 to $500 books.
uh i buy them there and bring them back but uh otherwise i mean most of our pricing is is actually done through experience it's very rare we ever look up at the value of a book i mean it's one out of every couple hundred books we'll check with the last copy for it and try to do we almost always price it according to memory as to what our last copy is you know i can't remember and the demand you asked though we've had a lot of requests for it well we don't you know some of the most of the books i ever buy i
Of course, we stick with fairly traditional things, but I don't know that we go by request.
I have a brother, Jerry, who takes care of search service.
That's the request division.
We sort of take care of it.
In here?
Yeah.
He takes care of book search service.
You said a brother, Jerry, working in here?
He's the man out of the shop.
He's actually off this afternoon.
He had an appointment.
And the binder is my nephew, I think I told you that.
Ben's son works here, and my son works here part-time.
It's more or less sounds like a family business.
Well, no more or less.
We even have an ex-wife from a brother that was 25 years ago that works here.
That's funny.
He left his wife, but we kept her because she's pretty good.
Do you ever buy something, and Dave Kirshenbaum would do this with Bradley White and say, Bradley, I've got something you've got to have.
I mean, does that ever happen?
What do we say to a customer?
Well, you see something and you say, I know the customer who could go crazy over this.
Rosenbach used to do that.
Sometimes a ploy, though.
Of course.
I don't know if that happens, but I wouldn't even call it a ploy.
Well, I think I'd love for somebody to call me and say, I don't know if you've got the Brindley catalog, which I don't.
You want it?
Yeah.
How much?
What are we talking?
Do we say that?
I don't say that as a matter of course.
I might have said that.
But I hopefully never say the same things twice, because I would never have much success.
I try to come up with something that I believe in.
But I mean, you might run across something that's particularly exciting.
Do you get excited by books?
I'll tell you, I think books are sometimes, like drugs, you need a bigger and bigger fix all the time.
The books that used to excite me, now I need a little bigger high.
I need something more important.
Give me some examples.
It takes something extraordinarily unusual to get excited about.
We get excited about opportunities a lot, I think.
Opportunities to buy important collections.
Much more excited about buying exciting collections and selling.
Also great copies, I think, get excited.
Every so often we see a copy of an important book that we've never seen a copy quite like it, and we say, this is unbelievable.
Look at this copy.
And that would excite us.
Not necessarily the book, but the copy of the book.
And so I think we think of it in those terms.
And I just want to make a comment on the buying, and that is we buy
not necessarily by title, but by interest.
In other words, a subject interest.
We don't know the book at all, but we know that there is a demand for this type of book.
And so we'll buy on that basis rather than individual title.
Luke, tell me, because I didn't have a machine, tell me about that first American printings edition collection.
I'm actually forming that collection jointly with James Cummings, bookseller.
And it was our feeling about seven years ago that a lot of great books
are getting so that they're no longer affordable so we decided to buy them as they first appeared in this country mostly 18th century america printed a lot of the classics for the first time and uh we have a cutoff date of 1800 actually as we won original editions of the great books that is the original edition had to appear before the 1800s uh and we uh
put together about 300 biomes, and we're going to try to get about 350 biomes.
We want to get up to about 1,000 biomes.
We have no interest in selling it.
Of course, we're going to do a catalog of hopefully someday.
It's sort of, it's really a fun project more than anyone else.
We'll eventually sell it, but I think we're more honest about it, that we will sell it.
I mean, we're collecting, we're having a good time.
If somebody wanted to buy it now, they'd have to pay more than it's worth.
Now, you and Jim are doing this jointly.
Did you get a chance to talk to Jim?
I know Jim, and we've chatted, and I only go to New York to see him.
But I'm really doing the least accessible interviews first, and kind of coming back, although I've done a number of interviews in New York and Boston.
But Jim and I have talked, and we're really talking.
Right.
But Jim will tell you about it.
We just started with one book.
We just said, well, we'll never sell this book.
Let's just put it away.
And we found enough books we wouldn't sell.
We said, you know, I have about six first American editions.
I can't sell them.
He couldn't sell them.
They were relatively cheap, $50 to $500.
I mean, relative compared to how much the first appearance would be.
But as a collection, it might be pretty nice.
We think you have 800 books on the coffee table.
If you have one, you might have a hard time selling it.
Well, where is the collection?
Most of it is up there.
Some of it is the bindery having cases.
Does Jim have any in New York?
No, they're really relatively small physically.
A lot of the 18th century American books were small.
Is this the first concerted collection that you put together?
I probably put together other collections, but much more modestly.
Oh, I think we put together collections of bibliography in the beginning, and booksellers, memoirs, and things like that, through the years.
Yeah, we consider that collection of reference books all collecting, in a sense, because we do have seven and a half thousand volumes up there now.
We've never been people to take out of stock our best books and hide them.
We've always had them out there.
Yeah, well, I think the perception of what I said,
Very few dealers have been able to get away with this.
Rosenbach is one.
I mean, he would say, well, if you don't buy it, I'm going to keep it for myself.
And it worked.
Well, if you have enough money in the bank, we're practical about it.
We feel that everything is for sale.
We're business people.
Well, we've done that ourselves.
All these books you see here are the ones that when customers didn't buy them, we said, well, we'll keep them ourselves.
This is the stock.
By the way, how large would you say the stock is?
You know, I was told you it was close to $10,000.
I would have had much more.
No, that's all.
Because it's spread out, you see.
You mean in all the rooms or just down there?
Well, 10,000 volumes for sale and 7,500.
There are about 20,000 volumes in total, maybe.
That's all.
And it is important to point out, I'm doing a piece, by the way, for a very interesting publication.
This is a book I'm writing for a very interesting publication.
And one of the questions they have asked me to see if I can answer is, has book selling changed
dramatically today from what it was, say, during Rosenbach's time that you had Dr. Rosenbach.
I wish I was there.
And Hans Kroos, you know, and George.
Oh, I think those people are much brighter than the books I was today, much more scholarly.
I mean, there are exceptions, but for the most part... Well, I think also they dealt in... You are one of the few full-service books.
Well, it's amazing, but it's understandable, because people buy what they could relate to.
And, you know, an edition of St.
Augustine from the 15th century doesn't mean anything.
a first edition of Hemingway's first book, Three Stories and Ten Films.
It's worth $10,000.
Well, it did better than that at the Bradley Martin sale.
Well, it depends on the copy.
I'm just saying it.
The contrast is such that, and even most people who heard of Hemingway never heard of Three Stories and Ten Films, right?
Well, when you went to a sale like the Bradley Martin sale, did you go, and you were busy.
I was busy, but I wasn't as busy as I thought I'd be.
I mean, I hoped to buy more.
I have very mixed theories about sales, because when the price is extremely low, it's a little scary, and when they're extremely high, it's a little difficult.
I like it just so I could buy some material.
I mean, if I bought more than 25% of what I bid on, I'd be really... Were you there buying basically for stock or for corn?
Yeah, I think we bought almost exclusively for stock in Bradley.
Well, there were no... I went to about four of them, I think.
Yeah, we split it up.
Most of the ones that I went to were the Natural History sales.
And natural history is not necessarily a field that we specialize in, but there was some wonderful colored late natural history books.
And Lou and I really are probably first businessmen, and then secondly booksellers.
And if you say that open enough, he's going to have to write a book.
Yeah, I agree with you, though.
Believe me, I've already turned it down.
One of the reasons we've diversified as much as we have is because we never wanted to miss an opportunity.
Outside of the book business?
No, within the book business, you know, people don't deal in incunables and fine printing.
It's just not the thing you find in the book business.
It's very unusual.
I mean, that's a bigger difference in modern literature.
And so we've found that if we have an opportunity to make some money in something rather than say no, we'll invest and make money rather than pass it on to somebody else.
That's the one thing we feel makes the shop somewhat unusual in that we refuse to specialize.
People say, what do you specialize in?
We pursue opportunities as they're available.
And our specialty does change as the interest in certain types of material change.
Like, we might all of a sudden find that we're going much heavier into one area more than another, only because the demand is there.
You know, the tracks are there, and we see the tracks, and we move the train along where the tracks go.
And that seems to be the way we've been going.
You know, if you read the Rosenbach book, you probably remember the one quote when he was at a sale, and he was bidding on a book in 2022, and he dropped out.
And then the book went for, like, $15,000, $17,000.
They were just about to sell it, and Rosenbach raised his hand.
And after the sale, they came up to him and said, Mr. Rosenbach,
Why did you buy the book?
You dropped that at $2200."
And he says, I didn't know there was so much interest in the book.
That's a wonderful story.
It was in one of his books.
Well, that's a good example of how we feel.
You know, hey, if something's real expensive, we're going to pursue it.
Ed Roth, who I interviewed, who wrote that book, he said, which was extraordinary, that he thought that he worked for what was a biography, not only his biography, and then he was a library publisher.
But he thought that Krauss was a better book man, with respect to that he knew more about books.
He was a scholar.
And you mentioned that one of the differences, perhaps, between books selling today and in the olden days, is that they were more scholarly.
They knew their books.
I mean, have you fellas...
I think that's true.
Well, of course, we have more reference.
I think the reference material we have available is much better.
I mean, auction records, and there are more frequent sales, and there's better communication through Vax and telephone that we could be more aware of current prices.
But what kind of an apprenticeship, say, does a person have to do to become a competent bookseller?
We have so many people that have worked for us.
We've probably had a hundred people work for us over the years that have come in.
A lot of them have started their own shops.
I've actually counted one day over 20 people that have their own shops that used to work there, you know, because they worked there a few years.
You know, Glenn Horowitz started at this grant.
Sure.
I mean, everybody starts someplace else.
We're the only ones who started.
You know, I swear this is a true story.
When we started out, we moved
When we opened the bookshop in Compton, and we moved to Hollywood Boulevard after a year, we had no idea what we were doing.
And the first day, we were building shelves, and I said, Ben, I'm going to go take a walk.
I walked down the street, and I came back, and I said, Ben, you're not going to believe it.
There's another guy doing the same thing we're doing, selling used books.
I mean, I thought we invented selling used books.
Can you believe it?
The same thing we're doing?
At what point?
William Zaffer wrote a wonderful essay at times.
You know, they used to be used books, but at some point, you crossed the line from used
which have been previously owned, and become antiquarian, become rare, and a different kind of pattern is attached to the book.
It's like, you know, there's a fine line between junk and antiques.
I think the first time that we were able to sell a book for more money than was on the price tag of the book,
We found we were in the real book business.
I was saying the first time we found a book that was said $2.50, you know, when we first started selling books, most books were $1.50, $2.50 when they were sold new.
And when we first used to sold a book that was priced for $1.50 for $2.50, we knew we were in a very special business, that we were getting more than the publisher was.
And I think that was the first time we realized we were no longer selling used books.
that they actually proved in value.
Right.
That there was a value to the text.
The first reference book we ever had that told us prices, because we really had no knowledge what's about the prices, was a book put out by a guy in San Francisco by the name of Roski, and it was called The Bookman's Bible.
And Roski had it coded so that you can code year, the author's last name and first name and the title of the book,
And an odd number would give you auction records.
An even number would be a dealer's price.
And whatever Roski said, if Roski said $3, we'd say, well, these are professionals that charge $3.
We'd price it $1.50.
And we didn't realize at the time that $3 was auctioned.
It could have been auctioned from 20 years ago.
And sometimes we'd get a big, beautiful, elaborate book, and it'll save $5.
I don't think Roski ever said more than like $120 on anything.
But we were really impressed with him, because every book we ever looked for seemed to be in there.
And then one day we went up to San Francisco, we said, let's go and visit Roski, because he was a bookseller up there.
And we realized that he was selling books that were real junk, like Salvation Army books.
And we still have Roski somewhere just for a souvenir.
But that was our real first reference book.
Lou says he went straight from high school into book selling.
How about yourself?
What's your background?
Well, I went from high school.
I worked a couple of years, went into the service.
I served as librarian in the service, and then came out and started book selling then.
Really?
Well, I worked in the, I had, it was a small base up in northern Ontario.
There were 200 people on the base.
I volunteered for the library because I enjoyed reading, and it was an opportunity to order the books I wanted to read.
So I said, oh, yeah, if I can order the books.
They said, oh, yes, what the job responsibilities are.
Northern Ontario in Canada?
Northern Ontario in Canada was an early warning site for staff.
Air Force?
Yeah, that's right, for the Air Force.
And so it gave me an opportunity.
There's nothing else to do up there.
It was 500 miles from, like, the closest small town, which was called Sioux Lookout.
And so this was a wonderful opportunity to get everything I wanted to read.
Was it nurtured at home?
Your love for reading?
It sounds like it was something that you...
No, I think it was out of boredom.
No, I mean, it is interesting that so many members of this one family is in the book business.
I'm just wondering, you know, what this comes from.
I think a lot of it had to do with profitability, to be very frank with you.
I didn't enter the book business because I, well, Lou didn't either, because we thought that this is something, a love of books.
I think it had to do with, we thought it was an opportunity with a very little bit of money
to be able to do something productive, to do something successful.
My father had been in the porn shop business, and this was kind of a little bit like the same thing of used type merchandise.
So we were thinking in terms of used type merchandise.
How old are you then?
I'm 52.
So you're part of this emerging, this generation, which I've seen, you know, kind of replace
I've seen you guys at the auction houses, and it really is, as I mentioned to your brother, you see one generation that says, not even in their 60s, I mean 70s and 80s, and then you see a crowd, like in the mid-40s, early 50s, that's kind of taken over in their own way.
Did you have a question come up?
Well, when we first joined, you know, we remember the ABAA, of course, and when Lou and I first joined the Southern California Chapter, which was probably about
22 or so years ago, the average age of the book dealer there was probably 65 or so.
And we, at our first meetings, you know, were just, I felt so uncomfortable because there was nobody there I really thought I had anything in common with, except we all were in the same business.
And today, if you go to the meetings, and there are certainly so many more members in Southern California than there were then,
There are lots of people younger than me, older than me.
Most of them are younger than me.
So I'm probably considered old for the book business these days.
I think the whole book business has changed.
You see some in their 20s and now in their 30s, which amazes me.
But I guess...
You really aren't... You were very honest and candid, and you said you came into this really looking for a way to make a living.
Exactly.
Not because of any passion for books.
I got out of... When I was discharged from the service, I had saved through... Maybe that's the way to do it.
Maybe you shouldn't have the passion for books.
If I had the passion for books, I probably couldn't sell them.
Do you agree with that?
If you had a passion for books...
Well, there are booksellers that are, I think, closet collectors.
Oh, there are quite a few.
Yeah.
In fact, my theory is they're all closet collectors, except for Venn and I. This fellow wanted this book because it's printed on blue paper.
Very unusual.
Now, what is the book?
It's a classic, one of the classics.
It's a 17th century classic, but printed on blue paper.
I think that's not the original.
No, no, no.
It's just very unusually printed on blue paper.
Ben was saying that, ask him why.
Maybe he has a different answer.
You're such successful booksellers.
You just found out how unsuccessful.
You just found out we only grossed 25% of the minimum you anticipated.
That's not bad money, though.
I feel like we just lost 15 or 16 million.
You go to the Garden Sale.
I mean, it's just the way it is, and that was supposed to be this, and it was.
It was wonderful.
I'm starting my book with that sale, you know, with Dick Manning by the Shakespeare's, and you were probably there.
But, you know, that sale totals $16 million for 314 lots.
The night before that sale gets underway, on a Wednesday night, a Japanese collector spends $21 million for a de Kooning, a living artist.
So everything is relative.
All right, so the book business is not... Well, I'll tell you one thing.
I mean, maybe what you should have done is sell paintings, you know.
But you know, you asked somebody like Steve Massey from Christie's, you said, Stephen, what collections are coming up?
Great collections.
You can count them on one hand, how many left in the country like that.
Either two or three.
We say that, but, you know, South East has a pretty interesting sale coming up, a one-person sale in October, I'm told, and I forget the name, it's in my other notebook.
You don't mean Coke, do you?
No, Coke was a bust.
Oh, yeah, well, of course, it was brought in most of his stuff.
Yeah.
Were you at that sale?
No.
That was in London, was it?
No, that was at Christie's.
That was a bust.
That was barely a million dollars.
I mean, and Coke was there.
Yeah.
I mean, I was with Bart Auerbach.
I'm surprised he didn't stop collecting it, at least.
Well, I think he basically has.
Well, he shifted them, let's go to the least.
Well, he bought awfully aggressive.
He was quite aggressive.
The feeling was that the stuff, the quote is too fresh in the market.
That's true.
It's much more interesting.
He just bought it, and why the hell is he selling it so soon?
If there was another bookshop for sale, an antiquarian bookshop in New York City, it had a stock worth a million dollars, and there was one in Los Angeles worth a million dollars, and I could buy them both, I would never consider the one in Los Angeles, because all my clients have seen it.
I'd jump at the opportunity to consider one in New York.
You mean to buy the books?
To buy the books, too.
I'm saying to buy a freshman, too.
It's the same thing.
It's too recently on the market.
It's been exposed.
Everything is traceable in that sale.
They could tell.
The Poverdines is right here.
Everything came through.
It was recently purchased.
There was a lot of speculation.
I'm going to just turn this on the other side.